PROLOGUE

A Friday in November
It happened every year, was almost a ritual. And this was
his eighty-second birthday. When, as usual, the flower was
delivered, he took off the wrapping paper and then picked
up the telephone to call Detective Superintendent Morell
who, when he retired, had moved to Lake Siljan in Dalarna.
They were not only the same age, they had been born on the
same day—which was something of an irony under the
circumstances. The old policeman was sitting with his coffee,
waiting, expecting the call.
“It arrived.”
“What is it this year?”
“I don’t know what kind it is. I’ll have to get someone to tell
me what it is. It’s white.”
“No letter, I suppose.”
“Just the flower. The frame is the same kind as last year. One
of those do-it-yourself ones.”
“Postmark?”
“Stockholm.”
“Handwriting?”
“Same as always, all in capitals. Upright, neat lettering.”
With that, the subject was exhausted, and not another word
was exchanged for almost a minute. The retired policeman
leaned back in his kitchen chair and drew on his pipe. He
knew he was no longer expected to come up with a pithy
comment or any sharp question which would shed a new
light on the case. Those days had long since passed, and the
exchange between the two men seemed like a ritual
attaching to a mystery which no-one else in the whole world
had the least interest in unravelling.

The Latin name was Leptospermum (Myrtaceae) rubinette.
It was a plant about four inches high with small, heather-like
foliage and a white flower with five petals about one inch
across.
The plant was native to the Australian bush and uplands,
where it was to be found among tussocks of grass. There it
was called Desert Snow. Someone at the botanical gardens in
Uppsala would later confirm that it was a plant seldom
cultivated in Sweden. The botanist wrote in her report that it
was related to the tea tree and that it was sometimes
confused with its more common cousin Leptospermum
scoparium, which grew in abundance in New Zealand. What
distinguished them, she pointed out, was that rubinette had
a small number of microscopic pink dots at the tips of the
petals, giving the flower a faint pinkish tinge.
Rubinette was altogether an unpretentious flower. It had no
known medicinal properties, and it could not induce
hallucinatory experiences. It was neither edible, nor had a
use in the manufacture of plant dyes. On the other hand, the
aboriginal people of Australia regarded as sacred the region
and the flora around Ayers Rock.
The botanist said that she herself had never seen one before,
but after consulting her colleagues she was to report that
attempts had been made to introduce the plant at a nursery
in Göteborg, and that it might, of course, be cultivated by
amateur botanists. It was difficult to grow in Sweden
because it thrived in a dry climate and had to remain
indoors half of the year. It would not thrive in calcareous soil
and it had to be watered from below. It needed pampering.

The fact of its being so rare a flower ought to have made it
easier to trace the source of this particular specimen, but in
practice it was an impossible task. There was no registry to
look it up in, no licences to explore. Anywhere from a
handful to a few hundred enthusiasts could have had access
to seeds or plants. And those could have changed hands
between friends or been bought by mail order from
anywhere in Europe, anywhere in the Antipodes.
But it was only one in the series of mystifying flowers that
each year arrived by post on the first day of November. They
were always beautiful and for the most part rare flowers,
always pressed, mounted on water-colour paper in a simple
frame measuring six inches by eleven inches.

The strange story of the flowers had never been reported in
the press; only a very few people knew of it. Thirty years ago
the regular arrival of the flower was the object of much
scrutiny—at the National Forensic Laboratory, among
fingerprint experts, graphologists, criminal investigators,
and one or two relatives and friends of the recipient. Now
the actors in the drama were but three: the elderly birthday
boy, the retired police detective, and the person who had
posted the flower. The first two at least had reached such an
age that the group of interested parties would soon be
further diminished.
The policeman was a hardened veteran. He would never
forget his first case, in which he had had to take into custody
a violent and appallingly drunk worker at an electrical
substation before he caused others harm. During his career
he had brought in poachers, wife beaters, con men, car
thieves, and drunk drivers. He had dealt with burglars, drug
dealers, rapists, and one deranged bomber. He had been
involved in nine murder or manslaughter cases. In five of
these the murderer had called the police himself and, full of
remorse, confessed to having killed his wife or brother or
some other relative. Two others were solved within a few
days. Another required the assistance of the National
Criminal Police and took two years.
The ninth case was solved to the police’s satisfaction, which
is to say that they knew who the murderer was, but because
the evidence was so insubstantial the public prosecutor
decided not to proceed with the case. To the detective
superintendent’s dismay, the statute of limitations
eventually put an end to the matter. But all in all he could
look back on an impressive career.
He was anything but pleased.
For the detective, the “Case of the Pressed Flowers” had
been nagging at him for years—his last, unsolved, and
frustrating case. The situation was doubly absurd because
after spending literally thousands of hours brooding, on
duty and off, he could not say beyond doubt that a crime
had indeed been committed.
The two men knew that whoever had mounted the flowers
would have worn gloves, that there would be no
fingerprints on the frame or the glass. The frame could have
been bought in camera shops or stationery stores the world
over. There was, quite simply, no lead to follow. Most often
the parcel was posted in Stockholm, but three times from
London, twice from Paris, twice from Copenhagen, once
from Madrid, once from Bonn, and once from Pensacola,
Florida. The detective superintendent had had to look it up
in an atlas.

After putting down the telephone the eighty-two-year-old
birthday boy sat for a long time looking at the pretty but
meaningless flower whose name he did not yet know. Then
he looked up at the wall above his desk. There hung fortythree pressed flowers in their frames. Four rows of ten, and
one at the bottom with four. In the top row one was missing
from the ninth slot. Desert Snow would be number fortyfour.
Without warning he began to weep. He surprised himself
with this sudden burst of emotion after almost forty years. 